# breast-cancer-shape-vs-size
Investigating Whether Shape or Size is a Better Predictor for Malignancy in Breast Cancer Tumors

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in women with cancer, and is the most frequently diagnosed cancers in women globally. 1 in 8 women in the united states will develop breast cancer in her lifetime so breast cancer screening is extremely important for early detection to decrease the mortality rate and improve treatment out comes for patients, as early stage breast cancer has a survival rate of 98%. 
There is always some kind of imaging or sonography involved in breast cancer diagnosis to determine where the tumor is and can also help to locate metastasis. Testing for biomarkers also helps with determining the treatment regimen.
For this project, I found a data set called the breast cancer wisconcin diagnostic dataset. It was established by Dr William Wolberg at the Univesity of Wisconsin. The data insluces 569 instances of 30 featires such as tumor radius, area, texture, etc. as well as the diagnosis for each instance so the M is malignant and B is benign. Here I showed a screenshot of using the head function after I imported the data into a jupyter notebook to get a better idea of what the raw data looks like. 
I wanted to develop a research question based off of what the data was showing me so after looking at the names of the different features, I wanted to understand more whether shape or size was a better indicator of malignancy. I grouped the features based off of my own understanding of shape and size, so for size I included radius, perimeter, area and fractal dimension and for shape I included texture, smoothness, compactness and concavity. I used the means for this project, but the dataset did include the standard errors and the worst values. 
The data preprocessing steps included data cleaning and data visualization. This is a very commonly used dataset, so it didn’t require much cleaning, but I did check on if there were any nul values to remove, which there weren’t. To visualize the data, I wanted to look at the distribution of each feature for malignancy and benigness. Here are just three examples from radius, texture and perimeter. The y axis is the frequency of the feature and the x axis is the measure of the x axis.
The model I decided to use was logistic regression because the output is categorical so either malignant or benign and we can use multiple features as inputs such as radius, area and etc. I also converted our benign and malignant values to binary values so benign was 0 and malignant was 1, which was appropriate for the logistic regression model. 
First, I split the data into a training set and a test set and trained the training set, where we used the size features: area, radius, perimeter and fractal dimension and the model predicated  an accuracy of 0.93 which is 93% accurate. Then we used the model to predict malignancy in the test set, and it produced either B for benign or M for malignant for each test data point.
Finally, I plotted and ROC curve to get an idea of the true positive rate vs the false positive rate. The area under the ROC curve is 0.923 which is close to the result of the model that predicts true positives 93% of the time. 
For shape, I split the data into a training set and a test set and trained the training set, where I used the size features: texture, smoothness, compactness, concavity and the model predicted an accuracy of 0.78 which is 78% accurate. Then I used the model to predict malignancy in the test set, and it produced either B for benign or M for malignant for each test data point 
Finally, I plotted and ROC curve to get an idea of the true positive rate vs the false positive rate. The area under the ROC curve is 0.758 which is close to the result of the model that predicts true positives 75% of the time. 
From this analysis we can see that size is a better predictor of malignancy than shape. 
According to the literature this makes sense becayse tumor size is one of the most indicative features of disease progression and prognosis. The literature also notes that tumor topology can be associated with malignancy but we didn’t have many texture features in this dataset. 
In the future we can investifate how other models would analyze this data set and categorize malignancy. 
We can also ask other questions like "can this data be combined with biomarker data to understand more about the pathogenesis of the disease and determine treatment directions?"
